# 6.2 Content structure in trainings

A training has the aim to educate its participants, engage communities and support exchange and networking. There are **two strategies** for structuring the content of a training:

1. A **mix of foundational (basic) and advanced** content.
2. **Only foundational (basic)** or **only advanced** content.

According to the first strategy a participant with no prior knowledge starts with basic components on day one and two of the training and continues with advanced ones on day three and four. If training covers multiple sub-topics aimed at diverse target groups, this structure allows integrating different knowledge levels while keeping the participants interested and engaged. The second strategy focuses on either basic or advanced components targeted at more specific audience types, which enables a more complex design of training content.

Either strategy allows the presence of topics offering a **broader outlook on a subject** and the ones with a more **specific perspective.** Furthermore, **breaks** between the training blocks are vital to let attendees process previously learned information and to discuss it informally.

**6.2.1 Start of the training - introduction and welcome**

Every training starts with **welcoming** of all participants and the **introduction** to the event. A welcome word can be brief and done by the planners and trainers or it can include extensive greetings from the higher management level. The **introduction** explains organisational aspects and should include the following points:

* Organisational points:
  * **Objectives** of the training
  * Explanation of the **programme**
    * content-wise (e.g. basic, advanced)
    * time-wise (e.g. breaks)
  * **Documentation** (where and how material will be available afterwards)
  * **General rules of conduct** (e.g. confidentiality, courtesy)
* Enquiry about **expectations and wishes** of the participants

The expectations and wishes should ideally be collected on a (digital) whiteboard which can be consulted during the event. If training is held online, the information on the code of conduct should be provided (camera on/off, microphone on/off, handling of questions (e.g. chat)). If training is offered in person the organisers have to explain the location of different rooms and bathrooms as well as drinks and snacks during breaks.

If training is rather small and includes up to 20 participants, it offers an opportunity for an **introduction round**. This helps attendees to get to know each other, the trainer can get insights about their knowledge and background. It is up to the organisers whether the introduction round is a simple self-presentation or uses didactic methods engaging the creativity of the participants. If a training consists of a larger group of participants an introduction round might not be a viable option, or has to involve methods defined especially for big groups[^1].

A fast way to dive into the topic after the introduction round is a **lightning talk or keynote,** held by an external expert or by one of the trainers. If training lasts longer than one day, there should be a short welcome and introduction on each day. These should set the atmosphere for another day of learning by:

* presenting the day's agenda and break times
* collecting open questions from the prior day
* repeating the objectives of the training

**6.2.2 Core of the training - formats and methods**

The core of the training are components in different **formats**, utilising various **methods** and **tools**. As mentioned in chapter §6.1 this diversity might depend on available resources but also on the choice of topics. Some topics work best as a workshop and others as a presentation. In most cases training contains both, but may also include other formats such as discussion rounds.

The **presentation format** often consists of a **lecture** and a **discussion.** This format works best for broader topics relevant for all participants and bigger groups. The lecture input can be supplemented with specialised materials on aspects mentioned during the presentation. Larger training might offer parallel presentations on different topics - in this case it is important to plan a timeslot for a (guided) exchange, so that participants can discuss their newly acquired information.

**Workshop** is the most frequently used format for upskilling training. During the workshop the participants learn interactively applying diverse methods and utilising various tools. Sometimes workshops offer the attendees the possibility to help each other by solving problems by applying new knowledge. Workshops might use methods such as a world café or the fish bowl to engage participants[^2]. When training is conducted online the **(digital) tools** can be used to encourage participants’ creativity: posters, whiteboards, voting tools serve as an interactive add-on to the missing in-person discussion and exchange, usually taking place in offline context.

A training with a larger number of participants (>30) might offer parallel workshops similar to parallel presentations. In this case each slot could include two or more workshops on different topics, which can also be repeated so that more participants can take part in them.

If training lasts longer than one day, there is also the possibility to create a recurrent **event** at the end of each day, such as a discussion based on the content of workshops and presentations. As mentioned in §6.2. **breaks** are very important so that participants can rest, reflect on the acquired knowledge and interact informally with each other.

**6.2.3 End of the training - conclusion and goodbye**

The end of a training should always be connected to its beginning. Have the communicated **objectives** been achieved? If not, what is missing? This also applies to the **expectations and wishes** collected at the onset of the training. If any expectations or wishes are still open, they might present a good starting point for the next training. A **feedback loop** allowing everyone to provide their reflections on the content, atmosphere and the structure of the training is also essential. It creates the opportunity for participants to mention what worked well, what was missing and what they are going to take with them. For this last component there are also several methods and tools that can be used, e.g. lightning round, position line or questionnaires[^3].

If training lasts longer than one day, each day should have a short conclusion and goodbye similar to the daily welcome and introduction. These include a short evaluation of the day, e.g. the inquiry on positive and challenging moments, open questions or unfulfilled expectations.

**6.2.4 Optional component - after work**

The content training components can be complemented by an optional part - **“after work”** **social programme**, such as a dinner, a networking event or a guided tour. It offers the possibility to connect with other participants, organisers or trainers in an informal way, exchange information and make new links for future collaboration.\
In case of an online training, these events need to be supported by platforms or tools designed for an online exchange[^4].

If a training lasts longer than one day an extensive social programme can be elaborated , e.g. an afternoon trip might be planned or the hosting institution could be visited. As **interdisciplinary and intercultural exchange** builds a fundament of European projects, this aspect further strengthens the cooperation and partnership of the OA community.

[^1]: \[34] There is a large amount of books, articles and websites on methods for training and workshops. See for example Alenitskaya, S. (2017) Handbook with Methods for Workshops. Bundeszentrale für politische Bildung.

[^2]: \[35] Alenitskaya, S. (2017) Handbook with Methods for Workshops. Bundeszentrale für politische Bildung, 46 f.

[^3]: \[36] Alenitskaya, S. (2017) Handbook with Methods for Workshops. Bundeszentrale für politische Bildung, 227 f. Gather.town (https://www.gather.town/) is an example of such a platform.

[^4]: \[37] Gather.town (https://www.gather.town/) is an example of such a platform.
